TITLE: Psychologically Informed Physical Therapy Management of Chronic Musculoskeletal Pain in Culturally Diverse Populations: An Intervention Logic Model

ABSTRACT:
Culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) individuals are underrepresented in pain research, including studies of psychologically informed physical therapy (PIPT) for musculoskeletal pain. This perspective describes a conceptual framework for PIPT management of chronic musculoskeletal pain that identifies essential elements which can be culturally tailored to meet the needs of different CALD populations. Essential interventions, determinants of behavior change, and clinical outcomes were identified from studies of existing PIPT interventions for chronic pain. PIPT approaches shared the following essential interventions: (1) cognitive skill training, (2) general aerobic activity, (3) impairment-based therapeutic exercises, and (4) graded functional movement training. An intervention logic model was developed to conceptualize how these interventions might promote active coping behaviors and greater engagement in physical activity, therapeutic exercise, and functional mobility. The model included physical and cognitive-emotional processes that may contribute to behavioral changes which ultimately reduce pain-related disability. To illustrate cultural tailoring of model constructs, we describe how intervention delivery and assessments were customized for Latino persons with chronic spine pain at a health center located near the United States (US)-Mexico border. A literature review of sociocultural influences on the pain experience of Latino persons was conducted, and essential elements of the model were operationalized to ensure that therapeutic goals, language, content, and processes were compatible with Latino cultural beliefs, values, and behaviors. Future research using the proposed model to adapt and test PIPT interventions for other CALD populations may help identify shared and divergent mechanisms of treatment response for culturally tailored pain management programs.

FULL TEXT:
## Introduction

The global prevalence of musculoskeletal pain continues to rise in both industrialized and developing nations with substantial costs for affected individuals and their communities . Systematic reviews support the effectiveness of multimodal biopsychosocial rehabilitation approaches that combine exercise with psychoemotional support for individuals with chronic pain 1 – 3 . Systematic reviews support the effectiveness of multimodal biopsychosocial rehabilitation approaches that combine exercise with psychoemotional support for individuals with chronic pain , although relatively few of these studies have been conducted in low- and middle-income nations 4 – 6 , although relatively few of these studies have been conducted in low- and middle-income nations or in ethnically and culturally diverse populations 7 or in ethnically and culturally diverse populations . Consistent with a biopsychosocial approach, psychologically informed physical therapy (PIPT) interventions for chronic pain have expanded rapidly over the past decade 8 . Consistent with a biopsychosocial approach, psychologically informed physical therapy (PIPT) interventions for chronic pain have expanded rapidly over the past decade . PIPT integrates physical, behavioral, and psychological treatment approaches to prevent and manage pain-related disability 9 , 10 . PIPT integrates physical, behavioral, and psychological treatment approaches to prevent and manage pain-related disability ; however, existing PIPT interventions rarely address socioeconomic, ethnocultural, or interpersonal contributors to pain 11 ; however, existing PIPT interventions rarely address socioeconomic, ethnocultural, or interpersonal contributors to pain . Although some PIPT interventions for chronic pain have demonstrated efficacy, their implementation in clinical practice remains limited with mixed reports of clinical effectiveness 12 , 13 . Although some PIPT interventions for chronic pain have demonstrated efficacy, their implementation in clinical practice remains limited with mixed reports of clinical effectiveness . Investigators have highlighted challenges in provider training and uptake of PIPT approaches, poor acceptance of PIPT interventions by some patients, and barriers in healthcare delivery systems that vary across treatment settings 9 , 10 , 14 . Investigators have highlighted challenges in provider training and uptake of PIPT approaches, poor acceptance of PIPT interventions by some patients, and barriers in healthcare delivery systems that vary across treatment settings . Large heterogeneity among existing PIPT interventions is another major barrier to implementation 9 , 10 , 15 , 16 . Large heterogeneity among existing PIPT interventions is another major barrier to implementation . Many PIPT treatment strategies have been described 10 , 16 . Many PIPT treatment strategies have been described , yet there is no consensus on essential interventions that should comprise a multimodal PIPT management approach for chronic pain. The extent to which any particular intervention may be more or less effective for a given clinical population or setting is also not known. 9 , yet there is no consensus on essential interventions that should comprise a multimodal PIPT management approach for chronic pain. The extent to which any particular intervention may be more or less effective for a given clinical population or setting is also not known.

Culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) individuals have been historically underrepresented in clinical research, including clinical trials for chronic pain . Cohort studies indicate that individuals from CALD backgrounds report worse post-intervention outcomes for pain intensity and emotional functioning compared to individuals from the predominant culture who participate in the same biopsychosocial intervention for chronic pain 17 , 18 . Cohort studies indicate that individuals from CALD backgrounds report worse post-intervention outcomes for pain intensity and emotional functioning compared to individuals from the predominant culture who participate in the same biopsychosocial intervention for chronic pain . A fundamental premise of PIPT is the need to address psychosocial factors that contribute to the onset and persistence of pain 8 . A fundamental premise of PIPT is the need to address psychosocial factors that contribute to the onset and persistence of pain , yet these factors are likely to differ for patients from varied sociodemographic and ethnocultural backgrounds. For example, a systematic review of the literature concluded that race, ethnicity, and culture are often associated with differing perceptions of illness, coping strategies, pain-related cognitions, self-efficacy, locus of control, and fear avoidance beliefs 11 , yet these factors are likely to differ for patients from varied sociodemographic and ethnocultural backgrounds. For example, a systematic review of the literature concluded that race, ethnicity, and culture are often associated with differing perceptions of illness, coping strategies, pain-related cognitions, self-efficacy, locus of control, and fear avoidance beliefs . Similarly, cultural beliefs and values influence engagement in physical activity and exercise interventions for the prevention and management of chronic health conditions 19 . Similarly, cultural beliefs and values influence engagement in physical activity and exercise interventions for the prevention and management of chronic health conditions . These observations suggest that PIPT interventions for chronic pain may be more acceptable and efficacious if tailored to individual beliefs and values which may differ across CALD populations. 20 . These observations suggest that PIPT interventions for chronic pain may be more acceptable and efficacious if tailored to individual beliefs and values which may differ across CALD populations.

We propose that PIPT management approaches for chronic musculoskeletal pain share common treatment elements that can be systematically investigated to identify both shared and divergent mechanisms of treatment response across different CALD populations. Identification of shared mechanisms can inform the selection of “essential” treatment elements that should be prioritized for inclusion in all PIPT interventions regardless of cultural identity, whereas divergent mechanisms may reveal new opportunities for cultural adaptations to optimize treatment outcomes for a particular CALD population. This report proposes an intervention logic model linking essential elements of a multimodal PIPT intervention for chronic musculoskeletal pain to determinants of treatment response which may generalize across patient populations and clinical settings. We then discuss how essential elements within the model may be influenced by sociocultural factors and illustrate how model elements can be tailored and empirically tested for a specific CALD population. The goal of this work is to provide a unifying framework for adapting and testing PIPT interventions in future research to better meet the needs of individuals living with chronic pain in a diverse global community.

## Overview of Approach

Pain rehabilitation theory and evidence informed the creation of an intervention logic model for PIPT management of chronic musculoskeletal pain ( ). Consistent with published guidelines for developing logic models , we first identified essential 21 , we first identified essential behaviors theorized to improve clinically meaningful theorized to improve clinically meaningful outcomes for individuals with chronic pain and mapped their relationship to potential for individuals with chronic pain and mapped their relationship to potential determinants of behavior change . We then identified 22 . We then identified interventions with the potential to impact essential behaviors and determinants of behavior change in the model. To illustrate cultural tailoring of the general model for a specific CALD population, we describe with the potential to impact essential behaviors and determinants of behavior change in the model. To illustrate cultural tailoring of the general model for a specific CALD population, we describe sociocultural factors that guided the selection of intervention delivery and outcome assessment for Latino persons seeking care for chronic spine pain in a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) located near the United States-Mexico border. Finally, we describe a plan to test and refine the general model to identify shared and population-specific mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects in future studies. that guided the selection of intervention delivery and outcome assessment for Latino persons seeking care for chronic spine pain in a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) located near the United States-Mexico border. Finally, we describe a plan to test and refine the general model to identify shared and population-specific mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects in future studies.

## Essential Behavioral and Clinical Outcomes of PIPT Management of Chronic Pain

A search of the literature for systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials of PIPT interventions for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults was conducted in Medline from inception through 2018 (initial search updated in July 2024) using a combination of key words and phrases to reflect constructs of interest for the population (e.g., chronic pain, musculoskeletal, low back pain, neck pain) and (e.g., chronic pain, musculoskeletal, low back pain, neck pain) and intervention (e.g., physical therapy, biopsychosocial, “psychologically informed”, multidisciplinary). No limits were placed on language and reference lists of identified articles were searched for potentially relevant systematic reviews. Two authors performed literature searches, reviewed abstracts for article selection, and extracted findings from full-text articles for narrative synthesis. (e.g., physical therapy, biopsychosocial, “psychologically informed”, multidisciplinary). No limits were placed on language and reference lists of identified articles were searched for potentially relevant systematic reviews. Two authors performed literature searches, reviewed abstracts for article selection, and extracted findings from full-text articles for narrative synthesis.

Summary tables from relevant systematic reviews were searched to identify the most common outcomes used to assess the effectiveness of PIPT interventions in primary investigations of chronic musculoskeletal pain. A total of 381 outcomes from 71 unique primary randomized controlled trials from 13 systematic reviews were grouped by measurement domain and expressed as a percentage of the total number of recorded outcomes ( 8 , 10 , 14 , 16 , 23 – 31 were grouped by measurement domain and expressed as a percentage of the total number of recorded outcomes ( ). The most frequently measured behavioral domains were functional activity/physical function/ impairment (30%), fear of movement (17%), self-efficacy (12%), mood/affect (10%), pain catastrophizing (9%), coping (9%), and treatment adherence (5%). Less frequently measured behavioral outcomes (<5%) included pain beliefs/knowledge, acceptance and commitment, and physical activity. The majority of clinical outcomes fell within three measurement domains: pain-related disability (36%), pain intensity (32%), and work/social participation or general health status (19%). Healthcare utilization (8%), pain quality or bothersomeness (4%), and quality of life (1%) were the least frequently reported clinical outcomes.

Pain-related disability was considered the primary clinical outcome in the logic model based on its high prevalence in the literature and general relevance across multiple clinical populations. Secondary clinical outcomes included pain intensity and work/social participation as the second most commonly reported outcome measures. Participation in work and social activities was considered particularly relevant for comparing PIPT treatment effects on occupational and social functioning in different sociocultural contexts. Other behavioral outcomes identified in this search were considered candidates for inclusion in the model based on their theoretical alignment with essential treatment elements and determinants of behavior change.

## Essential Determinants of Behavior Change

Essential determinants of behavior change were identified based on mediators of treatment effects for physical therapy, physical activity, and psychological interventions for chronic musculoskeletal pain in the general population. Compared to psychological interventions, relatively few studies have examined mediators of treatment effects for physical therapy or physical activity interventions for chronic pain . Limited evidence supports a role for improved 32 . Limited evidence supports a role for improved movement patterns , greater 33 , greater self-efficacy for physical activity (e.g., exercise, functional mobility) for physical activity (e.g., exercise, functional mobility) , reduced 32 , 34 , reduced pain catastrophizing , and decreased 32 , 34 , and decreased fear of movement (aka, kinesiophobia) (aka, kinesiophobia) . 35 . Exercise self-efficacy has also been shown to be an important determinant of adherence to physical therapist prescribed home exercise programs for chronic pain has also been shown to be an important determinant of adherence to physical therapist prescribed home exercise programs for chronic pain , reinforcing its inclusion as an essential determinant of exercise and physical activity behaviors in the explanatory model. 36 , reinforcing its inclusion as an essential determinant of exercise and physical activity behaviors in the explanatory model.

Psychological interventions used alone or in combination with physical therapy have consistently been shown to reduce pain-related disability through decreases in catastrophizing and and fear avoidance beliefs . Psychological interventions also reduce pain and disability by promoting more 32 , 34 , 37 – 41 . Psychological interventions also reduce pain and disability by promoting more adaptive pain beliefs , 34 , 38 , self-efficacy for managing pain , and 32 , 34 , 37 , 38 , 42 , and psychological flexibility . Perhaps less familiar to physical therapists, psychological flexibility refers to the ability to adapt to situational demands, reconfigure mental resources, and shift perspective to effectively balance competing life domains 32 , 37 . Perhaps less familiar to physical therapists, psychological flexibility refers to the ability to adapt to situational demands, reconfigure mental resources, and shift perspective to effectively balance competing life domains . Impaired psychological flexibility has been linked to cognitive rigidities such as rumination, worry, and perseveration 43 . Impaired psychological flexibility has been linked to cognitive rigidities such as rumination, worry, and perseveration which are commonly observed among those with chronic pain. Although psychological flexibility has primarily been studied in the context of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, systematic reviews suggest that different psychologically based interventions have similar mediators and may share overlapping mechanisms of action 43 which are commonly observed among those with chronic pain. Although psychological flexibility has primarily been studied in the context of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, systematic reviews suggest that different psychologically based interventions have similar mediators and may share overlapping mechanisms of action . 32 , 34 .

## Essential Interventions

Interventions considered essential to PIPT management approaches for chronic musculoskeletal pain were identified from pain rehabilitation theory and a review of treatment summary tables from the systematic reviews identified previously ( 8 , 10 , 14 , 16 , 23 – 31 ( ). Engel’s biopsychosocial model of healthcare has served as the foundation for several contemporary rehabilitation frameworks including PIPT 44 , 45 has served as the foundation for several contemporary rehabilitation frameworks including PIPT and Cognitive Functional Therapy 11 and Cognitive Functional Therapy among others. A common feature shared by these frameworks is the combination of traditional physical therapy interventions targeting physiological impairments and physical function ( 46 among others. A common feature shared by these frameworks is the combination of traditional physical therapy interventions targeting physiological impairments and physical function ( bio) with psychologically informed treatment elements targeting cognitive-emotional and/or cognitive-behavioral processes ( with psychologically informed treatment elements targeting cognitive-emotional and/or cognitive-behavioral processes ( psycho ). Notably, physical therapy management approaches that self-identify with the biopsychosocial perspective rarely address socioeconomic, ethnocultural, or interpersonal ( ). Notably, physical therapy management approaches that self-identify with the biopsychosocial perspective rarely address socioeconomic, ethnocultural, or interpersonal ( social) factors which contribute to the development and persistence of chronic pain factors which contribute to the development and persistence of chronic pain . 12 , 13 .

Physical therapists are experts in restoration of the human movement system through prescription of impairment-based therapeutic exercise and and graded functional movement . These skilled elements of traditional physical therapy intervention have demonstrated efficacy for the management of chronic pain disorders 47 . These skilled elements of traditional physical therapy intervention have demonstrated efficacy for the management of chronic pain disorders . In addition to skilled physical therapy, physical therapists are also advocates for physical activity promotion 48 – 54 . In addition to skilled physical therapy, physical therapists are also advocates for physical activity promotion . Recent Clinical Practice Guidelines specifically endorse aerobic exercise to reduce chronic low back pain 55 . Recent Clinical Practice Guidelines specifically endorse aerobic exercise to reduce chronic low back pain and walking is often recommended as a particularly feasible and effective form of 54 and walking is often recommended as a particularly feasible and effective form of general aerobic activity for managing chronic pain for managing chronic pain . 56 – 58 .

When combined with therapeutic exercise, psychologically informed interventions for chronic pain have been shown to be effective if delivered by physical therapists who are adequately trained in psychologically based strategies for pain management for chronic pain have been shown to be effective if delivered by physical therapists who are adequately trained in psychologically based strategies for pain management . In the context of physical therapy, we broadly refer to psychologically informed interventions as those derived from the field of psychology that aim to modify cognitive-emotional and/or cognitive-behavioral processes to facilitate more adaptive movement and other pain-related behaviors. Cognitive-behavioral based treatments derived from classic forms of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) have been the most commonly studied PIPT interventions 14 , 59 . In the context of physical therapy, we broadly refer to psychologically informed interventions as those derived from the field of psychology that aim to modify cognitive-emotional and/or cognitive-behavioral processes to facilitate more adaptive movement and other pain-related behaviors. Cognitive-behavioral based treatments derived from classic forms of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) have been the most commonly studied PIPT interventions . These approaches include a range of techniques that aim to restructure negative cognitive appraisals of pain to enact more adaptive coping behaviors 10 . These approaches include a range of techniques that aim to restructure negative cognitive appraisals of pain to enact more adaptive coping behaviors . Examples of cognitive-behavioral based interventions previously examined in PIPT clinical trials include cognitive restructuring, goal setting, activity pacing, distraction, and problem-solving 60 . Examples of cognitive-behavioral based interventions previously examined in PIPT clinical trials include cognitive restructuring, goal setting, activity pacing, distraction, and problem-solving . Elements of other psychologically based interventions considered distinct from CBT 10 . Elements of other psychologically based interventions considered distinct from CBT have also been incorporated into PIPT programs. For example, physical therapists have combined therapeutic exercise with psychologically informed strategies adapted from Pain Science Education (PSE), Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), graded activity/exposure using operant conditioning, and body awareness/relaxation techniques 61 have also been incorporated into PIPT programs. For example, physical therapists have combined therapeutic exercise with psychologically informed strategies adapted from Pain Science Education (PSE), Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), graded activity/exposure using operant conditioning, and body awareness/relaxation techniques . All of these psychologically informed interventions use various forms of 10 , 12 . All of these psychologically informed interventions use various forms of cognitive skill training with the goal of modifying pain-related cognitions, emotions, and/or behaviors to improve coping. Finally, with the goal of modifying pain-related cognitions, emotions, and/or behaviors to improve coping. Finally, motivational interviewing (MI) has been integrated into some PIPT approaches as an evidence-based method of communicating with patients to promote behavior change, in part by enhancing therapeutic alliance (MI) has been integrated into some PIPT approaches as an evidence-based method of communicating with patients to promote behavior change, in part by enhancing therapeutic alliance and adherence to prescribed interventions for chronic pain 62 and adherence to prescribed interventions for chronic pain . 63 .

In summary, PIPT interventions for chronic pain appear to share the following essential treatment elements, often enacted using motivational interviewing techniques to facilitate behavior change across all treatment domains: (1) cognitive skill training, (2) recommendations for general aerobic activity, (3) prescription of impairment-based therapeutic exercise, and (4) graded functional movement training.

## Mapping Relationships between Essential Elements

An intervention logic model ( ) was developed to conceptualize relationships among essential interventions, determinants of behavior change, desired behavioral outcomes, and clinical outcomes of PIPT management for chronic musculoskeletal pain. The model proposes that PIPT combines cognitive skill training with general aerobic activity, skilled prescription of therapeutic exercise, and graded return to functional movement by a physical therapist. Patient-centered goal setting in the four intervention domains primarily aims to reduce pain-related disability, with secondary improvements in pain intensity and work/social participation. These clinical outcomes are achieved through active cognitive and physical coping behaviors mediated by increased psychological flexibility and greater self-efficacy for managing pain, reductions in pain catastrophizing, fear avoidance, and maladaptive pain beliefs, along with reduced movement-related catastrophizing and fear, less impaired movement, and greater self-efficacy for physical activity.

## Need for Culturally Adapted PIPT Interventions for US Latino Persons with Chronic Spine Pain

Hispanic ethnicity and Spanish language are associated with reduced access and utilization of pain care services in the US . Physical therapy is particularly underutilized for pain management by Hispanic and Latino persons living in the US 64 . Physical therapy is particularly underutilized for pain management by Hispanic and Latino persons living in the US which suggests a need for linguistically and culturally tailored physical therapy interventions to improve the relevance and accessibility of evidence-based pain care for this CALD population. Some evidence suggests that Hispanic persons may experience higher levels of pain-related anxiety and pain catastrophizing than non-Hispanic White persons and may also rely more frequently on prayer and other passive coping strategies to manage pain 65 which suggests a need for linguistically and culturally tailored physical therapy interventions to improve the relevance and accessibility of evidence-based pain care for this CALD population. Some evidence suggests that Hispanic persons may experience higher levels of pain-related anxiety and pain catastrophizing than non-Hispanic White persons and may also rely more frequently on prayer and other passive coping strategies to manage pain . However, it is unclear whether PIPT is superior to traditional physical therapy for managing chronic pain or what cultural adaptations may be needed to optimize PIPT treatment outcomes for Hispanic persons seeking care for chronic musculoskeletal pain in the US. 66 , 67 . However, it is unclear whether PIPT is superior to traditional physical therapy for managing chronic pain or what cultural adaptations may be needed to optimize PIPT treatment outcomes for Hispanic persons seeking care for chronic musculoskeletal pain in the US.

## Identifying Sociocultural Influences on Model Constructs

We conducted a narrative review of the literature to identify potential sociocultural influences on model constructs in US Hispanic, Latino, and Mexican populations. These findings were then used to tailor essential elements of the general logic model ( ) to improve fit for Latino persons seeking care for chronic spine pain at a FQHC serving socioeconomically disadvantaged communities near the US-Mexico border. Below, we refer to the culturally tailored PIPT intervention as Goal Oriented Activity for Latino persons with Spine pain (GOALS/Metas) . We use the term Latino when referring to our target population because the majority of Hispanic persons served by the FQHC in our border community have ancestry from a Latin American country and share a Latin American heritage that may differ from Hispanic persons from other Spanish-speaking regions . We use the term Latino when referring to our target population because the majority of Hispanic persons served by the FQHC in our border community have ancestry from a Latin American country and share a Latin American heritage that may differ from Hispanic persons from other Spanish-speaking regions . For brevity, findings from the literature are summarized below using the more general term Hispanic/Latino, with Tables identifying specific ethnic subgroups in accordance with terminology used by the original studies. 68 , 69 . For brevity, findings from the literature are summarized below using the more general term Hispanic/Latino, with Tables identifying specific ethnic subgroups in accordance with terminology used by the original studies.

A literature search was performed in MEDLINE from inception through 2020 (initial search updated in July 2024) using combinations of key words and phrases to reflect constructs of interest for the population (e.g., Hispanic, Latino, or Mexican, ethnic*, minority health, culture, low back pain, neck pain, spine pain, chronic pain), (e.g., Hispanic, Latino, or Mexican, ethnic*, minority health, culture, low back pain, neck pain, spine pain, chronic pain), intervention (e.g., physical therapy, pain management, culturally competent care), and (e.g., physical therapy, pain management, culturally competent care), and outcomes (e.g., pain, function, disability, psychological distress, communication, knowledge, belief, attitude, behavior, coping, perception, access, utilization, patient acceptance of health care). No limits were placed on article type or language, and reference lists of identified articles were searched for potentially relevant studies. Two authors performed literature searches, reviewed abstracts for article selection, and extracted findings from full-text articles for narrative synthesis. Given the scoping nature of the review, no quality of evidence appraisal was performed (e.g., pain, function, disability, psychological distress, communication, knowledge, belief, attitude, behavior, coping, perception, access, utilization, patient acceptance of health care). No limits were placed on article type or language, and reference lists of identified articles were searched for potentially relevant studies. Two authors performed literature searches, reviewed abstracts for article selection, and extracted findings from full-text articles for narrative synthesis. Given the scoping nature of the review, no quality of evidence appraisal was performed . 70 .

provides a narrative summary of sociocultural factors that have been associated with the pain experience of US Hispanic, Latino, and Mexican persons including: 1) pain-related knowledge, beliefs, values, and behaviors, 2) pain-related symptoms, 3) coping styles and treatment preferences for chronic pain, and 4) healthcare seeking behaviors and experiences.

We identified 62 peer-reviewed publications addressing one or more of the topics outlined above, including three comprehensive review articles . A majority of primary studies used either cross-sectional survey/observational (N=36) or qualitative/mixed methods (N=18) research designs. A narrative review of findings from these studies revealed several themes related to sociocultural factors influencing the pain experience of US Hispanic/Latino persons ( 69 , 71 , 72 . A majority of primary studies used either cross-sectional survey/observational (N=36) or qualitative/mixed methods (N=18) research designs. A narrative review of findings from these studies revealed several themes related to sociocultural factors influencing the pain experience of US Hispanic/Latino persons ( ). First is the prominent role of family/ familismo in socialization, information gathering, and healthcare decision-making in socialization, information gathering, and healthcare decision-making . Although Hispanic/Latino persons are more likely than other racial and ethnic groups to seek informational and emotional support for chronic pain from family and friends 69 , 73 – 78 . Although Hispanic/Latino persons are more likely than other racial and ethnic groups to seek informational and emotional support for chronic pain from family and friends , a majority also report lacking knowledge on pain mechanisms and management 69 , a majority also report lacking knowledge on pain mechanisms and management which may limit the ability of social networks to provide informed advice. Several studies observed that pain-related beliefs and behaviors are strongly influenced by 79 which may limit the ability of social networks to provide informed advice. Several studies observed that pain-related beliefs and behaviors are strongly influenced by gendered social roles which differ for men and women and prioritize fulfilling roles related to family above self which differ for men and women and prioritize fulfilling roles related to family above self . Hispanic/Latino persons with chronic pain generally report fewer functional limitations than non-Hispanic White persons 75 , 80 , 81 . Hispanic/Latino persons with chronic pain generally report fewer functional limitations than non-Hispanic White persons , and both men and women express pride in enduring pain to uphold their respective social roles and avoid burdening others 82 , 83 , and both men and women express pride in enduring pain to uphold their respective social roles and avoid burdening others . However, some describe feeling stigmatized and misunderstood by family and friends when unable to fulfill social responsibilities due to pain 75 . However, some describe feeling stigmatized and misunderstood by family and friends when unable to fulfill social responsibilities due to pain . Feelings of embarrassment and shame, particularly among Hispanic/Latino women, can contribute to non-disclosure of symptoms and need for support 80 , 81 . Feelings of embarrassment and shame, particularly among Hispanic/Latino women, can contribute to non-disclosure of symptoms and need for support . 80 .

With regard to pain management, Hispanic/Latino persons often express a lack of knowledge about or experience with medically recommended non-pharmacological and self-management options for pain about or experience with medically recommended non-pharmacological and self-management options for pain . Despite a gap in formal knowledge, rates of prescription analgesic use are consistently lower among Hispanic/Latino persons due in part to social stigma and concerns about addiction, dependency, and adverse side effects 81 , 84 – 86 . Despite a gap in formal knowledge, rates of prescription analgesic use are consistently lower among Hispanic/Latino persons due in part to social stigma and concerns about addiction, dependency, and adverse side effects . Hispanic/Latino persons often view prescription medications as a last resort, instead endorsing a variety of self-care remedies/ 81 , 83 , 87 – 91 . Hispanic/Latino persons often view prescription medications as a last resort, instead endorsing a variety of self-care remedies/ remedios that range from traditional folk practices, herbs, and prayer to more contemporary pain management strategies such as exercise, changes in position, breathing, relaxation, massage, heat, mental distraction, and social activities with family that range from traditional folk practices, herbs, and prayer to more contemporary pain management strategies such as exercise, changes in position, breathing, relaxation, massage, heat, mental distraction, and social activities with family . Hispanic/Latino persons value interactions with providers with whom they have a caring and trusting personal relationship/ 69 , 71 , 73 , 74 , 78 , 81 , 84 – 86 , 92 – 94 . Hispanic/Latino persons value interactions with providers with whom they have a caring and trusting personal relationship/ personalismo and cite support from pain care professionals as the most important unmet need for those with chronic pain 73 , 95 and cite support from pain care professionals as the most important unmet need for those with chronic pain . We found preliminary evidence that Hispanic/Latino persons respond similarly or better than other racial and ethnic groups to multimodal interventions that combine exercise with cognitive behavioral approaches for chronic pain management 96 . We found preliminary evidence that Hispanic/Latino persons respond similarly or better than other racial and ethnic groups to multimodal interventions that combine exercise with cognitive behavioral approaches for chronic pain management which may reflect a cultural expectation and/or preference for self-care resulting in greater utilization of approaches that facilitate self-management 66 , 97 , 98 which may reflect a cultural expectation and/or preference for self-care resulting in greater utilization of approaches that facilitate self-management . 99 .

Finally, several studies provide evidence that Hispanic/Latino persons with chronic pain experience similar or greater levels of psychological distress compared to non-Hispanic White persons compared to non-Hispanic White persons . Symptom severity is related to established psychological risk factors and 66 , 75 , 83 , 100 . Symptom severity is related to established psychological risk factors and maladaptive pain beliefs including external locus of control (e.g., including external locus of control (e.g., fatalismo) , lower self-efficacy 101 , lower self-efficacy , greater fear avoidance beliefs 102 , greater fear avoidance beliefs , and anxious or depressed mood 103 , and anxious or depressed mood . Additionally, 102 , 104 , 105 . Additionally, physical stressors such as awkward postures, repetitive movements, and high work-rest ratios in manual labor jobs contribute to disproportionate rates of occupational injury and musculoskeletal pain in Hispanic/Latino workers such as awkward postures, repetitive movements, and high work-rest ratios in manual labor jobs contribute to disproportionate rates of occupational injury and musculoskeletal pain in Hispanic/Latino workers . 106 – 108 . Sociological stressors including perceived injustice and racial/ethnic discrimination have also been shown to predict greater pain intensity and pain-related disability including perceived injustice and racial/ethnic discrimination have also been shown to predict greater pain intensity and pain-related disability . Hispanic/Latino persons who immigrate to the US report 105 , 109 . Hispanic/Latino persons who immigrate to the US report ethnic, linguistic, and socioeconomic barriers to obtaining healthcare to obtaining healthcare which present an additional psychological burden. For example, multiple studies have confirmed that Hispanic ethnicity and Spanish language preference are associated with lack of health insurance coverage, reduced access to and utilization of professional pain care, and medical under treatment of pain 73 , 92 , 110 which present an additional psychological burden. For example, multiple studies have confirmed that Hispanic ethnicity and Spanish language preference are associated with lack of health insurance coverage, reduced access to and utilization of professional pain care, and medical under treatment of pain . Additionally, individuals with a preference for Spanish language report difficulty understanding verbal and written instructions for pain care and often rely on family and friends to communicate with healthcare providers 64 , 88 , 111 , 112 . Additionally, individuals with a preference for Spanish language report difficulty understanding verbal and written instructions for pain care and often rely on family and friends to communicate with healthcare providers . 72 , 77 , 85 , 113 .

## Optimizing Model Fit for Latino Persons with Chronic Spine Pain in a Federally Qualified Health Center

Themes from the literature review ( ) guided efforts to operationalize specific interventions and outcomes from the general logic model ( ) when adapting GOALS/Metas for an underserved US Latino population (see companion paper for an underserved US Latino population (see companion paper ). Overall, the available literature supported a PIPT approach combining cognitive skill training with skilled physical therapy to address both cognitive-emotional and physical contributors to pain-related disability among Latino persons. Sociocultural factors including language, health literacy, cultural beliefs and values, treatment preferences, and coping styles for biopsychosocial stressors commonly cited in studies of Hispanic/Latino populations guided the selection of culturally relevant treatment approaches for each intervention domain of the general model. For example, cognitive skill training for 114 ). Overall, the available literature supported a PIPT approach combining cognitive skill training with skilled physical therapy to address both cognitive-emotional and physical contributors to pain-related disability among Latino persons. Sociocultural factors including language, health literacy, cultural beliefs and values, treatment preferences, and coping styles for biopsychosocial stressors commonly cited in studies of Hispanic/Latino populations guided the selection of culturally relevant treatment approaches for each intervention domain of the general model. For example, cognitive skill training for GOALS/Metas included Pain Neuroscience Education included Pain Neuroscience Education to address lower health literacy and a general lack of knowledge about pain as well as maladaptive pain beliefs such as 115 to address lower health literacy and a general lack of knowledge about pain as well as maladaptive pain beliefs such as fatalismo . Cognitive restructuring . Cognitive restructuring and mindfulness-based techniques 10 , 116 , 117 and mindfulness-based techniques were included to address pain-related fear and catastrophizing, especially prevalent among Hispanic women. Cultural preferences for using prayer to cope with pain were contextualized as one of many helpful options to remain hopeful, reduce stress, and relax the body and mind. Strategies to improve self-efficacy were also included to leverage cultural preferences for self-management. These strategies included deep breathing/relaxation 116 , 118 , 119 were included to address pain-related fear and catastrophizing, especially prevalent among Hispanic women. Cultural preferences for using prayer to cope with pain were contextualized as one of many helpful options to remain hopeful, reduce stress, and relax the body and mind. Strategies to improve self-efficacy were also included to leverage cultural preferences for self-management. These strategies included deep breathing/relaxation , activity pacing 119 , 120 , activity pacing and creating goals for symptom self-management 121 , 122 and creating goals for symptom self-management . Self-efficacy for negotiating social roles in the context of chronic pain was promoted through instruction and role play in soliciting helpful social support 123 . Self-efficacy for negotiating social roles in the context of chronic pain was promoted through instruction and role play in soliciting helpful social support . The prominent role of valuing family/ 124 . The prominent role of valuing family/ familismo in Latino culture was further addressed by encouraging information sharing (e.g., explaining pain to a family member) and through the explicit inclusion of culturally relevant social activities in goal setting for all intervention domains (e.g., daily walks with a family member). Finally, motivational interviewing was retained as an essential treatment element in in Latino culture was further addressed by encouraging information sharing (e.g., explaining pain to a family member) and through the explicit inclusion of culturally relevant social activities in goal setting for all intervention domains (e.g., daily walks with a family member). Finally, motivational interviewing was retained as an essential treatment element in GOALS/Metas to leverage the cultural value of trusting personal relationships/ to leverage the cultural value of trusting personal relationships/ personalismo between Latino patients and their healthcare providers. between Latino patients and their healthcare providers.

With regard to physical treatment domains, traditional physical therapy interventions such as walking and therapeutic exercise were included as appropriate and acceptable strategies for pain management among Latino persons who generally endorse active self-management. Given the high prevalence of manual labor jobs associated with spine injuries among US Latino workers , task-specific functional movement training was included to remediate movement impairments and minimize cumulative stresses on the spine throughout the day. Particular emphasis was placed on instructing patients in safe postures and movements to reduce expectations of pain and fear of reinjury while engaged in appropriately paced activities of daily living 125 , 126 , task-specific functional movement training was included to remediate movement impairments and minimize cumulative stresses on the spine throughout the day. Particular emphasis was placed on instructing patients in safe postures and movements to reduce expectations of pain and fear of reinjury while engaged in appropriately paced activities of daily living . 127 .

Sociocultural factors also informed the design of GOALS/ Metas materials and delivery methods to improve fit for Latino persons who seek care in the FQHC setting. Written educational materials were provided in the patient’s preferred language (Spanish/English) and contained culturally relevant illustrations and activities to reduce linguistic barriers and perceptions of ethnic discrimination. Similarly, materials and delivery methods to improve fit for Latino persons who seek care in the FQHC setting. Written educational materials were provided in the patient’s preferred language (Spanish/English) and contained culturally relevant illustrations and activities to reduce linguistic barriers and perceptions of ethnic discrimination. Similarly, GOALS/Metas sessions were conducted in Spanish or English by bilingual physical therapists with personal knowledge of the Latino culture. Finally, access barriers were addressed using a hybrid delivery model that combined two face-to-face clinic sessions with six remote treatment sessions by telephone (see companion paper for details sessions were conducted in Spanish or English by bilingual physical therapists with personal knowledge of the Latino culture. Finally, access barriers were addressed using a hybrid delivery model that combined two face-to-face clinic sessions with six remote treatment sessions by telephone (see companion paper for details ). 114 ).

Outcome measures that had previously been translated, adapted, and validated for Spanish-speaking Hispanic/Latino populations were selected to ensure accessibility and relevance of outcome assessments for Latino patients with chronic spine pain. Consensus translation was performed for measures of essential model constructs when not previously validated for use in a Spanish-speaking Hispanic/Latino population. In addition to improving overall pain and disability, work and social participation goals were included as culturally relevant clinical outcomes for Latino persons who value strong social networks and whose household income is often disproportionately impacted by changes work status . 106 , 128 .

In summary, our literature review supported the potential for Latino persons with chronic spine pain to benefit from a PIPT approach encompassing all essential elements of the general intervention logic model. Detailed knowledge of sociocultural factors influencing the pain experience of Latino persons informed the selection of culturally appropriate treatment approaches, intervention delivery methods, and outcome assessments when tailoring elements of the general model to improve fit for Latino patients.

## Investigating Mechanisms of Treatment Effect

Intervention logic models provide an explanatory framework for generating testable hypotheses about mechanisms of treatment effect for complex behavioral interventions . Although such models are common in the field of psychology, their use in the study of treatment mechanisms for physical therapy and exercise interventions has been limited 21 . Although such models are common in the field of psychology, their use in the study of treatment mechanisms for physical therapy and exercise interventions has been limited . We anticipate that the proposed model will encourage future work to test sociocultural mediators and moderators of PIPT treatment effects in different CALD populations. For example, we are currently testing general and population-specific mediators of treatment effects for Latino persons with chronic spine pain in an ongoing clinical trial of the 32 . We anticipate that the proposed model will encourage future work to test sociocultural mediators and moderators of PIPT treatment effects in different CALD populations. For example, we are currently testing general and population-specific mediators of treatment effects for Latino persons with chronic spine pain in an ongoing clinical trial of the GOALS/Metas intervention intervention . Importantly, essential elements and sociocultural factors identified in the logic model guided 129 . Importantly, essential elements and sociocultural factors identified in the logic model guided a priori selection of outcome measures to be included in the clinical trial for planned mediation analyses. This approach will allow us to formally test whether determinants of behavior change identified in predominantly non-Hispanic White samples have similar or divergent effects on treatment outcomes among Latino persons. If different behavioral determinants are observed in clinical populations that function in a unique sociocultural context, this would suggest that the general model should be refined to reflect population-specific determinants of behavior change. The model proposes that sociodemographic factors such as race, ethnicity, acculturation, sex/gender roles, and age/generational status might differentially impact PIPT treatment mechanisms. Additionally, essential health behaviors are likely influenced by contextual and environmental factors such as cultural norms, social and occupational roles, access to socioeconomic resources, the built environment, and social support ( selection of outcome measures to be included in the clinical trial for planned mediation analyses. This approach will allow us to formally test whether determinants of behavior change identified in predominantly non-Hispanic White samples have similar or divergent effects on treatment outcomes among Latino persons. If different behavioral determinants are observed in clinical populations that function in a unique sociocultural context, this would suggest that the general model should be refined to reflect population-specific determinants of behavior change. The model proposes that sociodemographic factors such as race, ethnicity, acculturation, sex/gender roles, and age/generational status might differentially impact PIPT treatment mechanisms. Additionally, essential health behaviors are likely influenced by contextual and environmental factors such as cultural norms, social and occupational roles, access to socioeconomic resources, the built environment, and social support ( ). We suggest that future research should consider the influence of these sociocultural factors by conducting mediation and moderation analyses across different CALD populations using a common model of essential PIPT constructs and the relationships among them. This approach will help delineate shared versus divergent PIPT treatment mechanisms to better inform patient-centered care for a broader range of ethnoculturally diverse individuals.

For example, previous studies in the general population indicate that catastrophizing is a partial mediator of improvements in pain-related disability following cognitive behavioral, exercise, and combined interventions for chronic low back pain . Although some evidence suggests that catastrophizing may be greater among Latino women with chronic pain 32 . Although some evidence suggests that catastrophizing may be greater among Latino women with chronic pain , its role in mediating treatment outcomes of PIPT has not yet been examined in a Latino population. We will use conventional measures of catastrophizing (i.e., Pain Catastrophizing Scale 66 , its role in mediating treatment outcomes of PIPT has not yet been examined in a Latino population. We will use conventional measures of catastrophizing (i.e., Pain Catastrophizing Scale ) and pain-related disability (i.e., Brief Pain Inventory 130 ) and pain-related disability (i.e., Brief Pain Inventory ) to assess whether changes in pain catastrophizing mediate improvements in pain-related disability for Latino patients who participate in 131 ) to assess whether changes in pain catastrophizing mediate improvements in pain-related disability for Latino patients who participate in GOALS/Metas and whether these treatment effects are moderated by sex, acculturation, or generational status. We will also explore the possibility that other mediators not previously identified in studies of PIPT for the general population (and therefore not specified in the logic model) might also be important determinants of behavior change among Latino persons. Social support is one example of a sociocultural factor targeted by and whether these treatment effects are moderated by sex, acculturation, or generational status. We will also explore the possibility that other mediators not previously identified in studies of PIPT for the general population (and therefore not specified in the logic model) might also be important determinants of behavior change among Latino persons. Social support is one example of a sociocultural factor targeted by GOALS/Metas due to the important role of family in determining individual health behaviors in the Latino population. Social support will be investigated as a population-specific mediator of due to the important role of family in determining individual health behaviors in the Latino population. Social support will be investigated as a population-specific mediator of GOALS/Metas treatment effects using the Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Measure treatment effects using the Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Measure . 132 .

## Discussion

Racial and ethnic disparities in the experience, assessment, and treatment of pain are well-documented prompting several national organizations to acknowledge the need for culturally tailored care to promote equitable health outcomes 133 , 134 prompting several national organizations to acknowledge the need for culturally tailored care to promote equitable health outcomes . We propose an intervention logic model with essential elements that can be adapted for different CALD populations and sociocultural contexts to facilitate tailoring of psychologically informed physical therapy interventions for chronic musculoskeletal pain. The model suggests that PIPT combines psychologically informed cognitive skill training with general aerobic activity, skilled prescription of therapeutic exercise, and graded functional movement training by a physical therapist. These multimodal interventions promote active coping behaviors and greater engagement in physical activity, therapeutic exercise, and functional mobility mediated by adaptative changes in cognitive-emotional and physical processes. More adaptive cognitive and physical behaviors ultimately lead to clinically meaningful improvements in pain and disability and enable greater participation in work and social activities. The model also identifies sociocultural factors that are likely to influence PIPT treatment effects and can guide tailoring of model elements to optimize outcomes for a specific context and population. Essential elements of the general model should be operationalized to ensure that therapeutic goals, language, content, and processes are implemented in ways that are compatible with the sociocultural context of those receiving the culturally tailored intervention. Finally, culturally relevant mediators and moderators of PIPT treatment effects should be further explored to identify shared and divergent mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects across populations. 135 – 138 . We propose an intervention logic model with essential elements that can be adapted for different CALD populations and sociocultural contexts to facilitate tailoring of psychologically informed physical therapy interventions for chronic musculoskeletal pain. The model suggests that PIPT combines psychologically informed cognitive skill training with general aerobic activity, skilled prescription of therapeutic exercise, and graded functional movement training by a physical therapist. These multimodal interventions promote active coping behaviors and greater engagement in physical activity, therapeutic exercise, and functional mobility mediated by adaptative changes in cognitive-emotional and physical processes. More adaptive cognitive and physical behaviors ultimately lead to clinically meaningful improvements in pain and disability and enable greater participation in work and social activities. The model also identifies sociocultural factors that are likely to influence PIPT treatment effects and can guide tailoring of model elements to optimize outcomes for a specific context and population. Essential elements of the general model should be operationalized to ensure that therapeutic goals, language, content, and processes are implemented in ways that are compatible with the sociocultural context of those receiving the culturally tailored intervention. Finally, culturally relevant mediators and moderators of PIPT treatment effects should be further explored to identify shared and divergent mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects across populations.

## Implications for Clinical Practice

The proposed model provides a framework for clinical management of chronic musculoskeletal pain using PIPT approaches that combine four essential interventions to collectively address cognitive and physical impairments within the scope of physical therapy practice. Explicit guidelines on what constitutes psychologically informed physical therapy will promote greater standardization of PIPT management approaches across the profession and discourage the use of purely biomedical or psychological approaches that practitioners often conflate with PIPT . Importantly, clinicians have the flexibility to select from a range of evidence-based treatment options for each essential intervention included in the model. For example, cognitive skill training may include strategies adapted from cognitive behavioral, educational, acceptance and commitment, and/or mindfulness-based therapies 12 . Importantly, clinicians have the flexibility to select from a range of evidence-based treatment options for each essential intervention included in the model. For example, cognitive skill training may include strategies adapted from cognitive behavioral, educational, acceptance and commitment, and/or mindfulness-based therapies . Similarly, therapeutic exercise may include a variety of flexibility, strength, endurance, and/or motor control exercises depending on patient-specific impairments 115 , 118 . Similarly, therapeutic exercise may include a variety of flexibility, strength, endurance, and/or motor control exercises depending on patient-specific impairments . General aerobic activity may include walking, running, dancing, cycling, swimming, or circuit training 48 . General aerobic activity may include walking, running, dancing, cycling, swimming, or circuit training based on patient preference, and functional movement training can be tailored to personally relevant tasks of daily living. Such flexibility is consistent with patient-centered care which requires skilled clinical judgement to tailor PIPT assessment and management strategies to best meet the needs of individual patients 57 based on patient preference, and functional movement training can be tailored to personally relevant tasks of daily living. Such flexibility is consistent with patient-centered care which requires skilled clinical judgement to tailor PIPT assessment and management strategies to best meet the needs of individual patients . In addition to considering individual impairments, the proposed model suggests that it is imperative for clinicians to consider the sociocultural context when selecting and delivering treatments most likely to optimize outcomes for each individual. Highlighting the critical role of sociocultural factors in PIPT clinical practice models is an important step toward promoting more training, awareness, and active engagement in culturally competent care among physical therapists 139 . In addition to considering individual impairments, the proposed model suggests that it is imperative for clinicians to consider the sociocultural context when selecting and delivering treatments most likely to optimize outcomes for each individual. Highlighting the critical role of sociocultural factors in PIPT clinical practice models is an important step toward promoting more training, awareness, and active engagement in culturally competent care among physical therapists . 140 .

## Strengths, Limitations, and Implications for Research

Some have argued that existing rehabilitation frameworks derived from the biopsychosocial perspective lack specificity, are difficult to test empirically, and fail to adequately consider sociocultural determinants of health and recovery . We propose an evidence-based intervention logic model with measurable constructs that can be used to investigate shared and divergent mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects across a variety of sociocultural contexts. The general framework is grounded in evidence from systematic reviews of PIPT treatment outcomes and their mediators. As such, model constructs are limited by the existing body of research and will need to be refined as new evidence emerges, particularly for CALD populations not well represented in previous investigations. Given the prominent role of psychosocial factors that can vary substantially across diverse communities 12 , 13 . We propose an evidence-based intervention logic model with measurable constructs that can be used to investigate shared and divergent mechanisms of PIPT treatment effects across a variety of sociocultural contexts. The general framework is grounded in evidence from systematic reviews of PIPT treatment outcomes and their mediators. As such, model constructs are limited by the existing body of research and will need to be refined as new evidence emerges, particularly for CALD populations not well represented in previous investigations. Given the prominent role of psychosocial factors that can vary substantially across diverse communities , identifying population-specific determinants of PIPT treatment outcomes is a particularly promising area for future research. An ongoing clinical trial by our group 19 , identifying population-specific determinants of PIPT treatment outcomes is a particularly promising area for future research. An ongoing clinical trial by our group will test the proposed logic model as operationalized for Latino persons with chronic spine pain. It is our hope that this study can serve as a prototype for others to adapt and test PIPT interventions that may benefit other CALD populations. 129 will test the proposed logic model as operationalized for Latino persons with chronic spine pain. It is our hope that this study can serve as a prototype for others to adapt and test PIPT interventions that may benefit other CALD populations.

It should be acknowledged that the logic model proposed here is limited to physical therapy management of chronic musculoskeletal pain. Although multimodal PIPT approaches have been described for cancer , aging 141 , aging , stroke 142 , stroke , and multiple sclerosis 143 , and multiple sclerosis among other health conditions 144 among other health conditions , it is unknown to what extent essential elements of the model for chronic pain may generalize to other areas of clinical practice. Given its exclusive focus on pain 23 , it is unknown to what extent essential elements of the model for chronic pain may generalize to other areas of clinical practice. Given its exclusive focus on pain management , the proposed framework should be integrated with other clinical practice models used for the , the proposed framework should be integrated with other clinical practice models used for the assessment and classification of pain and pain-related movement disorders of pain and pain-related movement disorders to inform the prescription of specific impairment-based therapeutic exercises and functional activities within these essential treatment domains. Finally, the model is limited to behavioral mechanisms of PIPT treatment response. More comprehensive models are being developed to understand physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors affecting the diagnosis, management, and prognosis of chronic pain conditions 145 , 146 to inform the prescription of specific impairment-based therapeutic exercises and functional activities within these essential treatment domains. Finally, the model is limited to behavioral mechanisms of PIPT treatment response. More comprehensive models are being developed to understand physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors affecting the diagnosis, management, and prognosis of chronic pain conditions . In summary, findings from this study provide an explanatory framework that can be tailored to the unique sociocultural context of CALD populations to provide culturally and psychologically informed physical therapy for the diverse range of individuals affected by chronic musculoskeletal pain. 147 . In summary, findings from this study provide an explanatory framework that can be tailored to the unique sociocultural context of CALD populations to provide culturally and psychologically informed physical therapy for the diverse range of individuals affected by chronic musculoskeletal pain.
