TITLE: Knowledge, mechanisms, and intervention of the polytrauma clinical triad in military pain medicine

ABSTRACT:
This up-to-date review focused on the recent advances in the concept, interrelationship, and mechanisms of the polytrauma clinical triad (PCT), and intervention knowledge and approaches to its prevention and treatment from the perspective of military pain medicine, hoping to provide a scientific basis and reference of PCT. Many soldiers suffering from chronic pain coexist with post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury. If the above three diseases exist, it is called PCT. Three diseases in this common triad are interrelated and reinforce each other. This triad is challenging to treat and often leads to chronic issues, especially if not adequately monitored and managed. Although each disease of this triad could occur in isolation, it is valuable to know whether the rest of PCT needs to be screened. Current treatment of this triad emphasizes accurate identification and assessment of each disease, the new interdisciplinary and multimodal system of care, individualized customization principles, and shared medical decisions. To maximize clinical success and military service, interdisciplinary providers may benefit from the joint development of complementary treatment and biopsychosocial approach supported by theoretical and empirical evidence. The management of the PCT should emphasize integrative medicine and new interdisciplinary, multimodal nursing. Furthermore, cognitive behavioral therapy, standard rehabilitation care, and integrated health therapy have yielded valuable efficacy. It also should encourage the establishment of harmonious treatment relationships, shared medical decisions, and individualized customization principles to care for military service members with these comorbidities.

FULL TEXT:
## INTRODUCTION

Pain management has become an important part of military medicine [ ]. Soldiers experience high-intensity training and various kinds of combat pain, and often acute pain, which has not received timely intervention, becomes chronic pain. Prevalence of chronic pain among active duty service members in the United States (US) in 2012 was as high as 63%, and more than half were moderate to severe pain, often including musculoskeletal pain, non-traumatic joint disease, back and neck pain [ ]. In the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, more than 51,000 wounded US soldiers suffered severe pain, 44% of whom experienced persistent chronic pain for more than 3 months [ ]. In many, the chronic pain coexists with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI) [ ]. If all three of these conditions exist, it is called the polytrauma clinical triad (PCT). The three conditions in this triad are interrelated and often reinforce each other. They often occur due to the characteristic identity of the military population in the special war environment that is faced during the performance of tasks. This triad has been identified as an important issue and may pose significant challenges to the military health system [ ]. PCT is associated with sleep disturbance, cognitive impairments, and a significantly increased risk of suicide. This triad is difficult to treat, and results in chronic problems, particularly if not fully monitored and addressed. Although each disease of this triad could occur in isolation, it is valuable to know whether a single condition increases the risk of the entire triad and whether the rest of PCT needs to be screened for. Besides, acute or chronic pain is the primary reason for premature return from deployment, hospitalization, and cost to the military health system. Better trained and equipped pain physicians are extremely essential for active duty and retired service members of the army, and treatment efforts to prevent the transition of acute pain to chronic pain need to be strengthened for these members. Therefore, this up-to-date review focused on the recent research advances in the concept, interrelationship, and mechanisms of PCT and the knowledge and approaches of its prevention and treatment from the perspective of military pain medicine, hoping to provide a scientific basis and reference for the PCT ( ).

## 1) Post-traumatic chronic pain

Chronic pain, which is persistent or recurrent pain for more than 3 months, is a widespread problem among military personnel because of combat-related injuries and post-deployment stress [ , ]. It is common in both military and civilian environments and can affect the ability to effectively recover and return to work, increase disability risk, lower treatment participation, reduce quality of life, increase medical expenses, and increase the economic and caregiving burden on families and society [ , ]. Back or neck pain, musculoskeletal pain, and headache/migraine are the most common types of chronic pain [ ]. In an analysis of the annual medical surveillance monthly report of disease burden, the diagnoses of chronic pain increased from 85.5 per 10,000 person-years in 2009 to 261.1 per 10,000 person-years in 2018 [ ]. Subgroup analyses based on demographic characteristics also indicated an increased diagnosis of chronic pain among older adults, females, non-Hispanic blacks, and conscripts [ ]. Among service members, military personnel have the highest risk of chronic pain. About 25% of military service members are at risk for chronic pain, and female military personnel, who take opioids more often than male, are at higher risk for prescription opioid addiction [ ]. Trauma patients have a significantly increased probability of suffering from chronic pain after first aid. A 2001–2002 survey in the US found the prevalence of chronic pain to be 63% 12 months after a major injury, whereas post-traumatic chronic pain accounts for 20%–40% of chronic pain and incurs substantial medical expenditure as a result [ , ].

Chronic pain leads to diminished quality of life. It becomes a permanent feature of the lives of those affected, and its impact on well-being can be extensive, leading to fatigue, depression, sleep disturbance, physical and cognitive impairments, and changes in mood, personality, and social relationships [ - ]. Herrera-Escobar et al. [ ] reported a significant negative correlation between life quality and pain level after trauma, with up to 50% of patients after acute trauma complaining of pain every day, 23% taking pain medication every day, 46% complaining of restricted activity due to pain, 23% suffering from PTSD, and 41% not returning to their previous jobs. Despite increased opioid use, the number of patients with chronic pain after trauma has not substantially declined. The economic impact of pain is greater than most other health conditions because of its effects on absenteeism, reduced productivity, and increased risk in the labor market [ , ]. In Sweden, loss of production from absenteeism due to chronic pain was estimated to account for 91% of the socioeconomic cost of $87.5 billion associated with loss of production in 2003. A US study found that common pain conditions contribute to $61 billion in annual productivity loss, 77% of which is due to reduced productivity rather than absenteeism [ ]. Similarly, while the number of days absent from work is estimated at 9.9 million per year in Australia, the number of impaired working days are estimated at 36.5 million per year, which raises productivity costs from $1.4 billion to $5.1 billion [ ]. Management of patients with chronic pain is also needed based on economic considerations [ , ].

Many soldiers suffering from chronic pain also suffer from PTSD and TBI [ ]. Due to the high prevalence of PTSD, TBI, and PCT, the military and civilians have different pain experiences, which makes the treatment more complex [ ]. High-quality military-dedicated pain physicians are thus needed to safeguard troops’ combat efficacy and continuity development [ , ]. Military pain management in combat is primarily determined to be implementable, providing adequate analgesia is provided during battle and evacuation, which could be categorized into five levels based on medical location and analgesics administered against a pain grading [ ]. Current experience in pain management specific to the military population is lacking and requires a professionally trained first diagnosis team [ , ]. With the advances in battlefield medicine, protective armor, and rapid evacuation, the survival rate of wounded soldiers has exceeded 90%, but the treatment rate for pain is not as high as the survival rate [ - ]. It is reported that the average pain score for injured soldiers evacuated from Iraq and Afghanistan was 5.3 out of 10, with the most severe being 6.8. A third of patients reported pain reduction of 50 percent or less, and 65% reported inadequate pain relief within 24 hours of hospitalization, with the average pain score being 4.1 and the most severe pain score being 7.4 [ ]. More than half of 369 veterans treated at medical centers had persistent pain after discharge and pain scores being 4 or higher [ ]. Due to the difficulty of collecting data on pain on the battlefield on account of the priority given to saving lives and rapid evacuation of the wounded, there are limited references for pain management, which is also made more difficult by chronic pain and complications, as well as opioid tolerance and addiction. Counsel on active-duty service members for new therapies for analgesia, and opioid policies to ensure the efficacy of analgesic treatments in deployment settings, have further enhanced the role and value of pain medicine in the military [ ]. The construction and development of a strong army of pain physicians could preserve both the fighting power of the army and the medical preparedness of forces.

Chronic pain results from a continuous process of tissue damage, nerve injury, and nerve remodeling, and different types of pain mechanisms have overlapping intensifications [ ]. The long-term afferents of multiple pain signals will lead to peripheral sensitization, central sensitization, and disturbed pain modulation systems, thereby strengthening the afferents of pain signals to cause chronic pain [ ]. Determining the mechanisms of pain in wartime emergency settings is challenging although mechanism-based pain treatment is optimal, and opioids are the most efficacious agents for acute and chronic pain associated with neurological or tissue injury [ ]. A transition from intramuscular morphine to intravenous morphine [ ], oral fentanyl citrate coryne [ ], and finally to sublingual sufentanil tablets (SST), was gradually completed on the battlefield [ ]. SST may provide improved analgesic options to meet the unmet needs of the battlefield with its non-invasive nature, sublingual delivery system, and favorable pharmacological properties, mitigating the risk of side effects, opioid addiction, and adverse outcomes [ ]. Soldiers’ risk of PTSD is also reduced through effective acute pain management. SST has been pointed out as an important refinement of existing battlefield opioids, and improving rather than abandoning opioid use is key to managing military pain. For chronic pain, the average pain relief rate of opioids is about 30%, and few patients obtain long-term pain relief due to side effects limiting the maximum dose [ ]. Misuse, abuse, and addiction are major concerns with opioids. Opioids are not currently recommended as the first treatment for any type of chronic pain in clinical practice, and even many guidelines do not recommend their use in specific populations such as younger groups with non-cancerous pain [ ]. Some experts have called for the development of predictive models to identify candidates for opioids and reduce abuse and addiction [ ]. In addition, common gastrointestinal side effects after opioid analgesia such as nausea and vomiting are an important cause of patient discomfort and unsatisfactory treatment. The prevalence of nausea and vomiting reported in patients with chronic pain treated with opioids ranges from 10% to 50% [ - ]. Many of its mechanisms leading to nausea and vomiting involve central and peripheral sites, including the vomiting center, the chemoreceptor trigger zone, the cerebral cortex and vestibular apparatus of the brain, and the gastrointestinal tract itself. Nausea and vomiting have a negative impact on patient management and treatment efficacy because they limit effective analgesic doses that are frequently reported as reasons for discontinuing opioid analgesics [ - ]. Finding improved opioid-based analgesics and viable alternatives to opioids that act on other receptors, produce exact analgesic roles, and mediate intolerable side effects are urgently needed for patients with chronic pain [ , ]. These efforts include the following two aspects: first, providing delayed-release drug formulations and implantable devices, which can accurately distribute doses and only provide analgesic effects, and second, aiming to develop opioid drugs with fewer adverse reactions. Drugs such as UMB 425 can both excite μ and antagonizeδreceptors without developing tolerance. MMG22 can both induce analgesic effects onμreceptors and antagonize metabolic glutamate receptors believed to mediate addiction.

Pain treatment in the PCT is important, starting with the need to control acute pain (intramuscular morphine or SST) on the battlefield. It is also particularly important for chronic pain prevention and treatment to avoid conversion from acute to chronic pain whenever possible. To avoid issues such as opioid addiction, neurological effects, and substance abuse, multimodal analgesia such as acupuncture (Battlefield Acupuncture [ , ]), antidepressants and antiepileptic drugs [ , ] should be employed. For nonneuropathic pain, local and oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (tendonitis) are first-line treatment methods [ ], and pain management programs (such as the Multi-trauma Care System [ ]) may be adopted for chronic pain. A study exploring the proportion of soldiers who used care in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and Multi-trauma Care System (Polytrauma System of Care [PSC]) within 1 year after deployment showed that 26.6% of people were prescribed opioids, 35.5% of people received at least one non-drug treatment, and 83.8% of people received professional mental health treatment [ ]. It also points out that chronic pain is the most common multiple trauma among PSC users, and emphasizes the importance of adopting interdisciplinary pain management methods in PSC to reduce dependence on long-term opioid therapy and improve rehabilitation. Recognizing the complex rehabilitation and continuous health care needs of veterans injured during deployment, a comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation and assistive technology laboratory, as well as the development of special agreements, such as the emerging consciousness plan [ ]. After veterans experiencing chronic pain and PTSD were managed by an experienced team based on clinical needs, opioid administration declined in 17% of the military population and was discontinued in 25% [ , ]. Other intervention approaches include nerve block, denervation surgery, nerve stimulators, and implantable drug delivery systems [ , ]. Percutaneous peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS, which is a wire specifically designed for non-surgical, reversible implantation away from target nerves in the peripheral nervous system, which facilitates effective pain management) reduces limb pain, improves life quality, and promotes functional recovery after amputation in veterans [ ]. A study reviewing PNS-related research and clinical reports found that 75% of patients reported ≥ 50% clinically relevant relief of substantial chronic pain after amputation after 60 days of percutaneous PNS treatment [ ]. In addition, a multimodal approach, instead of opioids, is also currently emphasized in an attempt to maximize the benefits to patients with pain and reduce the drawbacks of conventional analgesic regimens [ ]. A study found that traditional Chinese acupuncture and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation reduced pain and its sequelae without risks associated with pharmacological pain management [ ]. Acupuncture for pain treatment is likely to relieve chronic pain independent of opioids [ ].

High-quality, dedicated military pain physicians are also needed to safeguard the combat efficacy of troops and continued development, with a higher value placed on military pain physicians because of their familiarity with pain conditions in the military. They play a leadership role in developing opioid policy and hosting clinical research in the military. Furthermore, anesthesiologists may also play a dual role of providing emergency trauma response and maintaining combat efficacy by performing high-level pain procedures. An emergent military needs continued training of pain physicians, development of military pain specialists, and construction of war preparedness teams.

## 2) Post-traumatic stress disorder

PTSD is a chronic disabling disorder characterized by intrusive reexperience, avoidance, numbness, and a high state of arousal, and the stress of combat, injury, distress, and death increases the risk of PTSD among military personnel [ ]. Traumatic events are a major cause of PTSD, which is already most relevant to the armed forces [ ]. Military personnel are at increased risk of exposure to traumatic events, which is accompanied by a 37.8% increased risk of developing PTSD [ ]. There was a higher prevalence of PTSD among Iraq deployers (12.9%) than among Afghanistan deployers (7.1%), and among combat deployers (12.4%) compared to those in other services (4.9%) [ ]. Forty-nine percent of chronic pain veterans also had PTSD, and experienced worse pain than those with chronic pain alone, and substantial impairment of physical function and life quality [ , , ]. The prevalence of PTSD is as high as 13%–30% in the military population, but only 6%–8% in the general population [ , ]. Furthermore, a meta-analysis examining 33 studies published between 2007 and 2013 involving 4,945,897 veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF)/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) reported an estimated 23% prevalence of PTSD [ ]. TBI worsened by PTSD in veterans is associated with greater pain, worse recall, and more illnesses than mild TBI alone [ ]. One study showed that the prevalence of PTSD per 1,000 service members steadily climbed from 1.24 in 2002 to 12.94 in 2016 in the active-duty force [ ]. Service members most commonly diagnosed with PTSD are aged 20 to 24 years, male, white, married, and in the US Army [ , ]. Before the start of OIF, the average annual increase in the prevalence of PTSD was 5.02%. After OIF initiation, the average annual growth rate of PTSD occurrence was 43.03%. Compared with the baseline period from 1999 to 2002, the prevalence of PTSD was almost seven times higher in 2008.

Life-threatening traumatic events are associated with the psychopathology of PTSD. A long-term stressor induces a stress response that is harmful to brain tissue and associated with behavioral disturbance [ , ]. Stressors in war settings are often unavoidable, uncontrollable, unpredictable, repetitive, and severe, and the properties of stress place the organism in a state of ongoing threat, resulting in a chronic stress response followed by physical and behavioral abnormalities [ , ]. Chronic stress leads to neural remodeling and circuit imbalances that induce an imbalance in systemic physiology through neuroendocrine, immune, and metabolic mediators, ultimately affecting cognition, decision-making, and mood [ ]. Chronic stress also decreases stress-related synapses in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus and increases stress-related synapses in the basolateral amygdala, leading to abnormally increased extracellular glutamate and upregulated neurotrophic factor [ ].

Psychotherapy is the mainstay treatment for PTSD. In the military population, risk factors for PTSD involve injuries, childhood trauma, war zone exposure, low service age, low education level, and less social support [ ]. If left untreated, PTSD leads to life-long functional impairment, and psychotherapy is recommended as the first-line treatment [ ]. Psychotherapy for PTSD is divided into focused trauma and focused non-trauma therapies. The former is a type of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) that focuses on traumatic details and cognitive processes. Non-trauma therapies focus on current life stressors, responses, goals, or relationships. Psychotherapy was also found to be effective in reducing PTSD symptoms in a study that included various populations, including refugees, military personnel, exposure to domestic violence, and transgression at an early age [ ]. Military service members benefit from evidence-based treatments for PTSD [ ]. However, they have worse psychological and physical outcomes compared with the populace, and many do not seek care and should be given greater priority [ , ].

Pharmacological therapy has had little success relieving PTSD symptoms [ ]. Because neurobiological mechanisms of PTSD are not well established, available pharmacological treatment options are currently limited. Currently, both sertraline and paroxetine are types of slow-acting antidepressants (SAADs), but their therapeutic effects are very limited, and most patients require multiple pharmacological treatments [ ]. Other SAADs include serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) imipramine, and monoamine oxidase inhibitor promethazine [ , ]. SAADs have efficacy in several depression, anxiety, and trauma-related disorders, but the specific mechanisms by which they exert their therapeutic effects are incompletely understood [ ]. In addition, current clinical efficacy studies of PTSD with a high level of evidence mainly focus on paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine [ ]. Meta-analyses also suggest efficacy for other SAADs, but mostly in small sample clinical trials [ ]. SAADs were more effective than a placebo in relieving PTSD symptoms, but their overall efficacy was limited, particularly in veterans [ , ]. In addition, regulating N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor is also a target of antidepressants, and in the context of linking depression with excessive glutamate neurotransmission and excitotoxicity, it was found that ketamine can target the regulation of glutamate neurotransmission, leading to the development of a new type of rapid-acting antidepressant [ , ]. The antidepressant effect of this drug is usually significant within a few hours after intravenous injection for more than 40 minutes and lasts for about 2 weeks after a single infusion [ ]. Furthermore, stellate ganglion blockade and yoga also have some effects, and most psychotherapy is supplemented by pharmacotherapy in PTSD treatment [ - ]. A retrospective review of medical records was conducted on 219 veterans admitted to a mental health facility for PTSD management. This group of military personnel was found to have a diagnosis of at least one other psychiatric disorder in addition to PTSD, and 96.8% had a diagnosis of at least one non-psychiatric disorder. The prevalence of general polypharmacy was 76.7%, while for psychiatric polypharmacy it was 79.9%, and for sedative polypharmacy 75.3%. The drug burden index ranged from 0 to 8.2, with 66.2% of participants scoring ≥ 1. This group of hospitalized veterans with PTSD had high general, mental, and sedative polypharmacy prevalence and was at high risk for drug-related adverse events [ ]. More and larger experiments are also needed to be a strong support for its treatment in the future [ ].

## 3) Traumatic brain injury

The prevalence of TBI among service members is higher than among civilians [ ]. Veterans are at high risk for head injury. More than 369,000 US veterans have at least one episode of TBI and report the onset or worsening of headache within 3 months of head injury [ ]. About 275,000 US soldiers deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan suffered from TBI, 75% of which involved explosion exposure [ ]. US military personnel with TBI may exhibit a range of symptoms and comorbidities, with 23,478 (55.9%) of 42,018 individuals with TBI experiencing at least one condition 1 month after injury, 26,831 (63.9%) 3 months after injury, and 29,860 (71.1%) 1 year after injury [ ]. Besides, a retrospective cohort study of trends in the prevalence of TBI among active-duty US service members from 1997 to 2007 included all 98,012 cases with TBI and 14,956,955 person-years of follow-up, yielding an overall prevalence of 6.55 per 1,000 person years [ ]. TBI prevalence has steadily increased over time, and its mean change was 8.5% per year. The largest increase in TBI prevalence, 38.4% new cases per year, was seen among those who served in Iraq.

In addition to post-concussion symptoms, those who sustain a TBI typically report chronic pain and PTSD symptoms. In OIF veterans, Hoge et al. [ ] found an association between TBI and multiple physical symptoms, including dizziness, chest pain, shortness of breath, and visual, cognitive, ear, and sleep disturbances that occur at 1 month, 3 months, and 1 year after injury. TBI is most common in PCT-related trajectories, indicating that TBI coexists with pain and mental health conditions [ ]. TBI is also associated with the development of chronic pain, in part by impairing perceptual functions [ ]. Twenty percent of veterans from the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts suffer from TBI, and up to 43.1% of these individuals also suffer from chronic pain [ ]. Combat veterans (116,913 cases) receiving Veterans Affairs care between 2007 and 2015 completed a comprehensive TBI assessment and received a standard diagnosis of TBI (none, mild, or moderate to severe) [ ]. It was found that 57% of the military population received ≥ 1 chronic pain diagnosis. Veterans with mild TBI had an independent risk of chronic pain, and those with moderate to severe TBI had a relatively higher risk. When TBI, depression, and PTSD were present together, the risk of chronic pain was additive and highest for mild and moderate or severe TBI. The prevalence of migraine is significantly higher in US Army soldiers returning from deployment, with 36% of US Army soldiers in a single combat trip reporting migraine symptoms [ , ]. An observational study found that PTSD, consciousness loss, and decreased reaction time were predictors of headache onset and severity after concussion [ ]. Mild head, neck, or back pain is more likely to occur after TBI [ , ].

Headache is most common, independent of injury severity, and is referred to as post-traumatic headache (PTH). Military PTH meets migraine criteria in most cases, ranging from 60% to 97% [ - ]. These symptoms may resolve on their own within 10 days, whereas some may persist for weeks or years in TBI patients [ , ]. A retrospective study reviewing the epidemiology and characteristics of PTH in military and civilian environments suggests that PTH appears to be more likely to occur after mild TBI (concussion) compared to moderate or severe TBI. PTH is usually similar to primary headache disease in clinical practice, usually migraine [ ]. Comorbidity of PTH and PTSD promotes PTH development and decreases treatment response [ ]. An observational cross-sectional study of 308 newly enrolled veterans showed that approximately 40% of veterans met the criteria for PTSD, 40% for self-reported current headache, 10% reported a physician diagnosis of migraine, 12% reported a physician diagnosis of tension-type headache, and 6% reported both types of headache. Combat related physical injuries and PTSD were shown to be independent predictors of self-reported headache. These veterans with both tension and migraine had higher rates of PTSD, whereas those with migraine alone had higher rates of combat related physical injuries [ ]. Furthermore, a randomized clinical trial which recruited 193 PTH samples with comorbidities of PTSD and found that 167 male veterans (87%) reported severe headaches and PTSD symptoms and found significant improvement in headache related disabilities in patients receiving cognitive-behavioral therapy treatment [ ].

Blast from improvised explosive devices and mines caused 50%–79% of deployment-related TBI in the military [ , ]. For the most part, blasts differentiate deployment-related military TBI from civilian TBI events. Animal studies have clearly shown that blast overpressure waves are transmitted to brain tissue and cause neuropathological changes most similar to diffuse axonal injury [ ]. Blast-related injuries occur through several mechanisms related to the nature of the blast overpressure wave itself and secondary and tertiary injuries. Injuries resulting from blast exposure may be caused by the initial overpressure (shock) wave resulting from the blast (primary blast), secondary (shrapnel/debris), tertiary (nearby people/objects), quaternary (burn, smoke/chemical inhalation), or even quinary (hyperthermia) blast mechanisms [ - ]. Blast-related injuries may adversely affect long-term health and affect troops’ resilience and battlefield performance [ ]. One study suggested that although some mild neurocognitive effects were associated with blast exposure, these neurocognitive effects may be better explained by PTSD severity than blast exposure or TBI history alone [ ]. A study showed that cognitive, emotional, and physical factors were higher in veterans exposed to explosion and TBI rather than those exposed to explosion but without TBI, and also higher in those with PTSD, although PTSD had no certain interaction with TBI or explosion exposure [ ]. Concurrent pain in patients with TBI results from brain injury, disorganized body pain modulation systems, and induced cognitive and emotional impairments [ , ]. Psychological changes such as depression and anxiety in PTH, as well as organic features such as skull fractures and dural tears, may be negatively correlated with the severity of TBI [ ]. Patients with mild TBI and organic lesions have a higher incidence of psychological disorders, while severe TBI can develop into affective pain perception disorders.

Medications such as antidepressants and triptans, and nonpharmacologic therapies such as cognitive rehabilitation and physiotherapy, are commonly used, and combinations of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapies are more effective in controlling TBI and pain than either treatment alone [ ]. Specific guidelines for managing pain and emotional conditions in patients with TBI are lacking, and current treatment is mostly symptomatic, supplemented by psychological assessment and rehabilitation up to now. In addition, chronic pain, PTH, PTSD, and sleep disturbance are common complications of TBI, which should not be considered an isolated condition but also requires treatment of comorbid conditions [ ]. Therefore, the combined use of drugs and non-drug treatments should be strengthened in the whole management process, and the prevention and treatment of psychological diseases and comorbidity should be strengthened [ , ]. The long-term efficacy of widely used pharmacological treatments such as antidepressants, cognitive exercise, and physical therapy remains unclear due to a lack of extensive randomized controlled studies [ ]. In a retrospective study of chronic military PTH, triptans were found to be particularly effective as acute agents emphasizing the predominant migraine phenotype, while topiramate was the only prophylactic agent associated with a statistically significant reduction in headache frequency [ ]. Moreover, high frequency of PTH calls for an evidence-based treatment approach in patients with TBI. Double blind placebo-controlled trials in the PTH population are warranted to see whether similar phenotypes of primary and secondary headache disorders respond similarly to treatment [ ].

## 2. Prevalence of polytrauma clinical triad

PCT has a high prevalence (6.2%–42.1%) not only in active-duty service members, but also in retired military personnel ( ) [ , - ]. The prevalence of PCT in veterans is significantly higher than that of ordinary people [ , ]. A comprehensive analysis of 340 OEF/OIF veterans demonstrated that chronic pain, PTSD, and TBI were present in 81.5%, 68.2%, and 66.8% respectively, while 42.1% were diagnosed with the above three diseases at the same time [ ]. Questions of chronic pain and psychiatric comorbidities among deployers during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan showed that pain was the most common chief complaint, with 87% reporting pain in the week before deployment, and 56% reporting moderate to severe pain. Eighty percent of participants met at least 1 of 7 comorbid questions (moderate or severe pain, PTSD, TBI, psychosis, anxiety disorder, mood disorder, and substance use), and 59% met two or more of the above questions [ ]. Veterans have an increased risk of PTSD and TBI, both of which are associated with increased pain and sleep disturbance, and veterans with both TBI and PTSD show more severe pain and sleep disturbance than those with TBI or PTSD only [ ]. Pain and sleep disturbance are interrelated, and each one will aggravate the other. A research review of 200 Iraq War veterans evaluated in a multi-trauma outpatient setting showed that sleep disturbance was highly prevalent (93.5%), with the majority of TBI diagnosed as mild, and significantly explained by the diagnosis of pain, PTSD, and TBI [ ]. Sleep disturbance mainly includes post-traumatic sleepiness, sleep apnea, narcolepsy, insomnia, and nightmares. Veterans with PCT are at risk for suicidal and violent tendencies, have more severe cognitive and mental symptoms, and significantly increase health care utilization and costs [ , ].

The previous study retrospectively analyzed all administrative claims data of active duty service members of the army for fiscal years 2010 to 2015 and showed a prevalence of 5.99 per 1,000 patients for all three diseases of PCT among 2,441,698 personnel. Patients with PCT were most likely to be 20–29 years old (52.2%), male (89.8%), white (59.1%), married (64.2%), and in the military (74.7%) [ ]. Among 613,391 veterans who received at least one VHA service, the full PCT expression was diagnosed in 6.0%, 9.6% with TBI, 29.3% with PTSD, and 40.2% with pain [ ]. Among 16,590 soldiers and veterans who used nursing in the VHA Multi-trauma Care System within 1 year after deployment, PCT had a prevalence of 27.6%, while 53.1%, and 48.6% presented PTSD and TBI, and 76.5% endured chronic pain [ ]. Furthermore, a cross-sectional study aimed to investigate whether this complex clinical presentation increases the risk of suicidal ideation and violent impulses after considering other established risk factors. Veterans (n = 667) who had served in the military since September 11, 2001, completed an interview and self-report. It was found that almost all participants (n = 630; 94.5%) reported chronic pain lasting for more than 12 months. In addition to chronic pain, 20.7% (n = 138) also reported TBI, 17.4% (n = 116) also suffered from PTSD, and 18.0% (n = 121) had both TBI and post-traumatic stress injury ( i.e. , multiple trauma clinical triad) [ , multiple trauma clinical triad) [ ]. Sayer et al. [ ] also found that, in a sample of 188 combat injured service members treated, 93.0% developed TBI, 81.0% endorsed pain, and 52.6% received some type of mental health service. Also in a study of 50 veterans found that 80.0% of patients developed TBI, 96.0% experienced pain, and 44.0% reported PTSD [ ]. Peixoto et al. [ ], in a study with 71 non-military personnel who were referred to a community clinic for chronic pain management after motor vehicle collision (MVC), showed that more than half of patients with chronic pain after MVC met the standard of PCT (52.1%). Therefore, the variability in PCT prevalence across above different studies were mainly related to using different research populations (active-duty service members, veterans, OEF/OIF veterans, combat-injured service members, soldiers, and veterans), different sample sizes, and different research institutions and countries.

## 3. Potential mechanism of polytrauma clinical triad

Some studies have found that pain, headache, and sleep have significantly deteriorated in patients with PCT. Pain could be aggravated by other unpleasant symptoms, and neuropathic pain tended to increase in PCT patients. This may be related to the increased central sensitization tendency of patients with brain-related diseases or nerve injury [ ]. Direct injury of ligaments and tendons may cause pain accompanied by muscle spasms and cartilage injury not diagnosed by traditional diagnostic imaging. A retrospective analysis of 5,137 records of combat-related extremity injuries suggested that the most common mechanism of injury was gunshot injury to the upper thigh or pelvis, followed by blast injury [ ]. Nerve injuries are caused by penetrating mechanisms such as gunshot wounds, blast fragments, or fractures associated with high-energy skeletal injuries that result in nerve transection, stretching, or shearing [ , ]. These neurological injuries are often associated with local and systemic vascular damage as well as bone and soft tissue damage. Emotional trauma may be the result of shock, stimulation, stress, potential threat to life, personal and financial insecurity, and expected negative impact on future health. In addition, a large number of veterans from the Gulf War continue to suffer a range of Gulf War illnesses (GWI) affecting neurological and musculoskeletal systems. The most common symptoms include pain and fatigue. One study observed their pain susceptibility and fatigue symptoms with a GWI mouse model, exposing mice repeatedly to a combination of Gulf War chemicals (permethrin, chlorpyrifos, and pyridostigmine bromide) and mild immobilization stress [ ]. It was found that mouse models recapitulated several aspects of human disease, including hyperalgesia, increased tonic pain, and impaired descending inhibition of pain. There is a strong association between pain and fatigue in patients with GWI suggesting a significant reduction in physical endurance. Skeletal muscle examination suggested that reduced mitochondrial function may contribute to fatigue symptoms. Furthermore, increased oxidative stress is associated with Gulf War symptoms. A pilot study with 12 male veterans showed that the number of days with worse fatigue was associated with higher C-reactive protein and amyloid A. Muscle and joint pain is associated with leptin, amyloid A, eotaxin 3, interferons γ-induced protein, and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 [ ].

Lew et al. [ ] reported a high prevalence of sleep disorders due to the interaction between pain and PTSD. Pain and TBI cause long-term cognitive problems and exacerbate each disease symptom [ , ]. One study with 90 veterans deployed to the Gulf War indicated that poorer sleep quality was found to be significantly associated with atrophy throughout the brainstem and brainstem subregions including midbrain, pons, and medulla. Poorer sleep quality was also significantly associated with lower fractional anisotropy in the nigrostriatum, medial forebrain tract, and dorsal longitudinal fasciculus [ - ]. There was a significant correlation between increased pain intensity and decreased fractional anisotropy in the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus [ , ]. The brainstem plays an important role in abnormal neuromodulation of pain and sleep on GWI. Decreased fractional anisotropy in the brain fibers connected by the periaqueductal gray matter area of the midbrain is associated with higher pain sensitivity after thermal stimulation [ ]. The dorsolateral funiculus bundle is an anatomical fiber connected from the hypothalamus and extends downward to the dorsal side of the spinal cord through the periaqueductal gray matter of the midbrain. This fiber bundle is considered a downward pain relief pathway called the downward pain system, which plays a key role in regulating the perception and experience of pain [ , ].

Besides, among 124 OEF/OIF veterans, event-related potentials triggered by targets and non-targets during the performance of a continuous performance task under degraded stimulus conditions revealed that decreased P3b amplitude in the parietal lobe may serve as an indicator of brain pathology following combat trauma, but decreased brain response could not distinguish the independent effect of explosion-related mild TBI or the severity of PTSD [ ]. The deployment of the Gulf War is related to the obvious neuroendocrine characteristics such as low levels of basic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in 24 hours, and the enhanced inhibitory effect of low-dose dexamethasone on cortisol and ACTH [ , ]. In one study, the ACTH of Gulf War veterans (GWV) with PTSD was significantly higher than that of GWV without PTSD, but there was no difference between GWV with PTSD and subjects without PTSD [ ]. In GWV, the unexplained medical health symptoms and PTSD of GWV are related to large hypothalamic-pituitary activity, which may reflect the increase of corticotropin-releasing factor and is only apparent when considering the deployment effect. Gulf War deployment and its associated exposure lead to persistent changes in pituitary function, or decreased hypothalamic-pituitary activity preventing the development of PTSD and other deployment-related health problems.

Although PCT often occurs in military personnel, many risk factors of chronic pain, PTSD, and TBI also exist in individuals who have experienced MVC. These include immediate onset of pain and suddenly changed brain speed, which may lead to TBI [ ]. TBI and PTSD usually occur after MVC, while chronic pain usually occurs after whiplash injury [ ]. Diffuse axonal injury may occur in the process of rapid deceleration as the mechanism of head injury and TBI development [ ]. These MVC-related diseases occur due to many of the same risk factors as explosive injuries and other injuries in combat. Exposure to traumatic injuries leads to rapid activation of the complement cascade as a major fluid defense system of innate immunity [ ]. The complement system acts as a master alarm system during molecular danger responses after trauma that could lead to adaptive immune responses and multiple-cell dysfunction.

Persistent cognitive impairment is a major central nervous system-related symptom in veterans with chronic GWI. Studies in rat models revealed that cognitive impairments in chronic GWI were associated with neuroinflammation, represented by astrocyte hypertrophy, activated microglia, and enhanced proinflammatory cytokine levels [ , ]. Brain injury is also associated with persistently elevated oxidative stress, chronic inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, attenuated hippocampal neurogenesis, loss of inhibitory interneurons, altered lipid metabolism and peroxisomes, and modified expression of genes associated with cognitive function. In addition, there is an increased intensity of reactive oxygen species and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the blood, with transformed gut microbiome and activated adaptive immune response. Investigations in veterans have shown that brain dysfunction in GWI is associated with chronic activation of executive control networks, impaired functional connectivity, altered blood flow, persistent inflammatory response, and changed miRNA levels [ - ]. One study investigated changed leukotriene (LT) signaling in the brains of rats, showing cognitive impairments 6 months after exposure to GWI-related chemicals and stress [ ]. Cysteinyl LTs and LTB4 levels were increased in the hippocampus, and 5-lipoxygenase expression was enhanced in neurons and microglia [ , ]. This change was also associated with increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. Brain-specific increase in LT signaling may contribute to the maintenance of chronic neuroinflammation in GWI.

## 4. Identification of the polytrauma clinical triad

Combat and deployment are associated with increased risk and frequent development of PCT. It not only affects troops’ staffing and combat efficacy but also has an impact on the military [ , ]. Without comprehensive and timely monitoring and resolution, this triad leads to chronic pain, sleep disturbance, cognitive impairments, and a significantly increased risk of suicide. Hoge et al. [ ] suggested that the clinically characterized conditions in veterans with PCT often overlap with each other, including headache, dysphoria, sleep disturbance, and memory disturbance, which makes differential diagnosis difficult due to the wrong attribution of symptoms to another condition. This type of diagnostic error is thought to negatively affect treatment decisions and recovery expectations. This problem has significant and wide-ranging implications for service members and their families. PCT occurs more often among military service members aged 30–39 years, with a higher proportion of PCT among married individuals, indicating suitability for targeted screening in these populations [ ]. It is essential to develop reliable identification and accurate assessment of PCT in individuals with various cognitive disorders, especially for patients with communication disorders.

## 5. Treatment of the polytrauma clinical triad

Based on the fact that PCT severely impacts the physical and mental health of active duty and retired military members, it is essential to take reasonable steps to provide pain treatment on the battlefield, as well as to actively combat the conversion of acute pain to chronic pain. There is an ongoing critical need to address issues such as the mental concerns of the military population (depression, sleep disturbance, and suicidal tendencies), family burden (medical expense and family conflict), and defense expenditures after the occurrence of PCT [ - , - ]. Both active duty and retired service members have a high prevalence of pain, PTSD, and TBI, which have negative impacts on physical ability, mental health, life quality, and medical burden [ - ]. A study of OEF/OIF veterans found that the co-occurrence of PCT conditions was associated with a significantly increased risk of suicidal tendency, but did not outweigh the increased risk associated with PTSD alone [ ]. Another study also found that veterans with TBI had greater difficulties with community reintegration, and were less likely to be employed than those without TBI [ ]. To date, syndromic treatment of PCT mostly takes an integrative, novel, and interdisciplinary therapeutic approach to achieve clinical efficacy. Experiencing one, two, or all three traumatic conditions tends to occur in combination more than in isolation. Risk awareness and accurate identification of the triad will be achieved through an integrated team approach to alleviate patient suffering, improve care efficacy, and help service members [ ]. Present studies have indicated that the use of multiple separate practice guidelines for patients with PCT may lead to accidental prescription and adverse interaction of multiple drugs ( ). Multi-drug therapy, especially those involving drugs acting on the central nervous system, may lead to drug overdose, chronic symptoms, and suicidal tendencies [ ]. However, new treatment methods in recent years can avoid this shortcoming. Peripheral opioid analgesic therapy, which activates opioid receptors outside the central nervous system, produces potent analgesic effects and avoids centrally mediated adverse reactions [ , ]. The mechanism of action of non-opioid peripheral analgesic therapy is to exert its effect by blocking the transient receptor potential V1 channel. A single 60-minute application can effectively relieve pain in patients with neuropathic pain for up to 12 weeks. The advantages of high-concentration capsaicin patches include long duration of efficacy, patient compliance, and low risk of systemic effects or drug interactions [ ]. Besides, dual-mechanism therapy includes agents that act as both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and weak opioids, such as amitriptyline, duloxetine, tramadol, and tapentadol [ ]. Targeting glial therapy include glial cell blockers, such as minocycline, AV411, naloxone, and naltrexone [ ]. All above measures can enhance the ability of opioid drugs to suppress pain, inhibit the development of opioid tolerance, inhibit the development of opioid dependence, suppress opioid rewards associated with drug abuse, and suppress other negative side effects of opioid drugs, such as respiratory depression.

Furthermore, psychotherapy (such as cognitive processing therapy [CPT] and prolonged exposure therapy) and pharmacotherapy (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs], noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants [NaSSA], and TCA) are relatively effective treatment methods at present. This is the most common psychotherapeutic approach for the treatment of PTSD. Individual treatment resulted in greater improvement in PTSD severity than group treatment. Depression and suicidal ideation improved equally with both formats [ - ]. However, even among those receiving individual CPT, approximately 50% still had PTSD and clinically significant symptoms. Besides, based on evidence with moderate certainty, SSRIs improve symptoms of PTSD and are first-line drugs for PTSD drug therapy; based on evidence with low certainty, NaSSA mirtazapine and TCA amitriptyline may also improve symptoms of PTSD; based on evidence with very low certainty, no benefit was found in the number of participants who improved after treatment with antipsychotic drugs compared to the placebo group [ , ]. Besides, Otis et al. [ ] created a 12-session integrated treatment regimen for chronic pain and PTSD that included CBT for chronic pain and PTSD. Core elements of integrative therapy include relaxation training, activity goal setting, weekly goal accomplishment, cognitive restructuring, recurrence prevention, and pleasant activity scheduling and pacing. It was found that participants who could complete the modified comprehensive treatment plan responded well to treatment. In addition, Ruff et al. [ ] observed the efficacy of a sleep intervention program for veterans with blast-induced TBI and headache. Its treatment consists mainly of sleep hygiene consultation (9 weeks) and nocturnal oral prazosin, a brain active α-1-adrenergic agonist, commonly used to treat hypertension and urinary outflow obstruction caused by benign prostatic hypertrophy. Chard et al. [ ] recently presented the results of a study that investigated the efficacy of a PCT-based treatment regimen in veterans with comorbid PTSD and TBI. The treatment regimen included weekly visits with professionals such as physiotherapy, speech, and occupational therapy [ - ]. In addition, CBT is a standard set of clinical instrumental psychological intervention and a ‘must try’ for PTSD patients and is also used as an adjunct to control chronic pain, TBI, anxiety, and depression [ , ].

A model of care that uses both conventional and unconventional therapies in a “whole person” manner is increasingly popular, seeking to achieve physical and mental health and alleviate chronic or multifactorial diseases [ ]. Specific effective interventions for PCT include mindfulness such as CBT, acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic massage, and breathing techniques [ - ]. Complementary and alternative medicine therapy, such as acupuncture, can be used as an auxiliary analgesic method by regulating the brainstem nuclei, which is important for the endogenous monoamine and opioid systems. Yoga is an exercise which induces changes in mental status, particularly analgesia, sedation, anxiolysis, and a sense of wellbeing. Appropriate massage can alleviate muscle pain symptoms by approximately 25% to 50%. Virtual reality immersion significantly reduces subjective pain ratings ( i.e. , analgesia, , analgesia, etc .) .) . Abuse problems and side effects of opiates could be reduced by a shift of the treatment range from traditional nonpharmacologic, nonsurgical treatments (CBT) to nontraditional treatments such as acupuncture, spinal nerve therapy, and mind-body techniques [ Abuse problems and side effects of opiates could be reduced by a shift of the treatment range from traditional nonpharmacologic, nonsurgical treatments (CBT) to nontraditional treatments such as acupuncture, spinal nerve therapy, and mind-body techniques [ ].

## CONCLUSIONS

The three components of PCT affect each other, resulting in a combined biomedical and psychological impact. Among servicemen and veterans, it has been found that these three diseases coexist, affect each other, and worsen each other, leading to prolonged physical and mental suffering. Ultimately, PCT leads to serious problems such as poor long-term prognosis, increased disability risk, lower treatment participation, reduced quality of life, increased medical expenses, and increased economic and caregiving burden on families and society [ , ]. To maximize clinical success and military service, interdisciplinary providers may benefit from the joint development of a complementary treatment and biopsychosocial approach supported by theoretical and empirical evidence [ ]. The management of the PCT should emphasize integrative medicine and new interdisciplinary, multimodal nursing. Furthermore, cognitive behavioral therapy, standard rehabilitation care, and integrated health therapy have yielded valuable efficacy. It also should encourage the establishment of harmonious treatment relationships, shared medical decisions, and individualized customization principles to care for military service members with these comorbidities.
